# Olympic_Medals_Analysis

_NOTE:_ There is no information about athletes for team competitions that consist of more than 2 participants. Only team records.
_NOTE:_ There are no results for qualification rounds. For instance, event 100-m men contains only final results without semi-finals and other hits.

**Introduction to Study:**

    The 2024 Olympics known as Paris 2024 is scheduled to take place from July 26 to Aug 11. The Olympic Games are a very popular, multicultural celebration to share in the world of sports and so much more. As there have been many changes and modifications to the Olympics, the focus of this study is to identify trends in the performance of countries over time. After the Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA), I will be utilizing the total awarded medals from the Olympics to predict how the top-performing countries might perform in the future Olympics, notably this upcoming 2024 Olympics. My hypothesis for this study is that the accumulation of previous medals correlates with an increased potential for winning an equal or greater amount of medals in the future Olympic Games. 

**Process and Challenges: **

	Initially, the three datasets (athletes, hosts, medals) are merged to form olympic_data, containing around 17,000 rows of data. It was then cleaned by removing a column that had more than 20% null values. Some important variables that I did most of this study with are medal_type (gold, silver, or bronze), game_season (Winter or Summer), game_year, athlete_year_birth, discipline_title (the overall discipline groups), country_name, athlete_full_name. These variables allowed me to create functions and visualizations that would showcase the performance of the countries and how their athletes and medals correlate with their success in the Olympics. It was followed by examining the data in the discipline_title and country_names and renaming the data with a class map. 
 
    Throughout this study, I encountered challenges in effectively presenting the data in a comprehensible manner. After finishing the EDA, I created a function called plot_heatmap that would display a green box (discipline played) or white box (discipline not played) with the rows containing the disciplines and the columns containing the years. It shows the common appearances of the disciplines over the years in the Olympics. Another important function is plot_trends, which would generate a bar chart of the country’s medals (gold, silver, bronze, or all) and the season (Summer, Winter, or both). It provided a more individualized overview of the country as well as the trend of the medals won at the Olympics. Another issue arose due to my limited experience in handling time series datasets, so I had to research to familiarize myself with the necessary techniques. I then encountered difficulties integrating the prediction models with my dataset as my preprocessing methods didn’t complement each other. After careful debugging, it successfully predicted 4 Olympic Games (2024 2026, 2028, 2030).

**Observations and Interpretations:**

    When visualizing the data, the USA is very dominant in the Olympics, totaling up to 2442 total medals, with Germany trailing behind by 868 medals. This massive lead may have been due to the boycott from the Soviet Union and their allies for the 1984 Olympics. The boycott led the USA to have reduced competition and it boosted their total medal counts to make them the medal count leaders of the Olympics. Also, this Olympics was held in the USA, and they could have had a home-court advantage, leading to more national pride and motivation to perform far better than their competitors. After the 1992 Olympics, there became a more cyclical performance from all countries. 
    
    Due to the Olympics's separation of the Summer and Winter seasons, each season will happen every 2 years, the graphs show a cyclical pattern. As there are more disciplines in the Summer season, the common pattern would be a spike up during the Summer Olympics and a drop in the Winter Olympics. On the contrary, Norway has shown an inverse to this pattern as they demonstrate exceptional performance in the Winter Olympics. Thus, they are taking a majority of the medals in the Winter and this could be due to their cultural importance in Winter sports as it snows often in Norway. This can be seen in their top two disciplines, which are cross-country skiing and speed skating, signaling their investment into the Winter sports. 
    
    From the graph ‘Number of ALL Medals Won by China during Both Seasons’, it can be seen that they had never gotten an Olympic medal until the 1984 Olympics. As mentioned earlier about the lesser competition during the Olympics, China was able to make its mark. This could have been a way where ‘success breeds success’. There could have been a late 20th century reform in the government and they might have had a shift in their investments after winning around 25 medals in the Olympics. They have then a strategic focus on certain key sports, where they have been known as a powerhouse in those sports. Some notable ones would be table tennis. Their concentrated efforts continue to maximize its medal-winning potential through talent identification as China strengthens its already winning disciplines. 
    
    When looking at the median athlete year of birth from this dataset, it shows that they were born in the years 1991 to 1996. So, I took a look at the newer generation of Olympic athletes that were born after 1996, which puts their ages around 25 years old. There was also a calculation and display of how many medals these young athletes won and how many were gold medals. The results revealed that most if not all of the medals they won were gold medals. This shows that young athletes have lots of potential and success from their early specialization in particular disciplines. They must have had better teaching, training techniques, and training equipment which exponentially increases the number of young athletes competing at the highest level. Not only that but also mentioned earlier, the young athletes are also prioritizing their country’s top disciplines. For example, both Katie Ledecky and Robert Finke are in swimming, which is USA’s second top discipline. 

**Conclusion:**

    Based on the predicted results, the USA will win the most amount of medals in the 2024 Olympics. I hypothesized earlier that there is a correlation between the accumulation of medals from the past, signaling previous success. This would show that they already have the experience of winning, therefore, they should be able to replicate that for future Olympic Games. Following the 2024 Olympics, it predicts that Germany will lead in the 2026 Olympics, China will lead in the 2028 Olympics, and Norway will lead in the 2030 Olympics. As previously observed, China has been the rising star in the Olympics since the 1984 Olympics and Norway has always shown dominance in the Winter Olympics. I would say that these predictions are supported by the analysis of the trends from the tables and visualizations.
    
    For my future research, obtaining more data regarding the events that contain more than 2 athletes would change the predictions as this current prediction model is projecting less due to less amount of data. In addition, the factors were very limited in the prediction of the future medal amounts as it’s not just based on previous medals won. So being able to add more data into the prediction dataset would be better, such as the amount of new disciplines being added to the Olympics, the number of young and veteran athletes, and also more data about the country itself. This data would consist of GDP, training programs, coaches, and investments, which would be very helpful to make a more accurate prediction. 
